Testing E-commerce Websites requires knowledge of web testing techniques and the e-commerce domain.

Most E-commerce Websites share a general common theme and structure, e.g:

    Homepage
    Search Results Page
    Product Details Page
    Order Form Page
    Order Confirmation Page
    Login Form Page and Accounts Pages

Of course, there are many other pages on a typical e-commerce website, but the main core user journey would entail touching the above pages and that’s where testing e-commerce websites should focus on: The Checkout Journey.

These “front-end” pages most likely communicate with “back-end” web services, such as Product Search Service, Content Service, Booking Engine, Payment Services, Accounts Services, etc. Therefore, it is important when testing e-commerce websites that we test individual services in isolation as well as integrated as a whole system.

A typical user journey flow would start at the homepage, or a product landing page, searching for a product, reviewing the product, adding product(s) to the shopping cart, fill in order details and payment details and submitting the order.
Ideas for Testing E-commerce Websites

We have already discussed tips and guidelines for testing web applications and common test methods and test techniques for web application testing which are also applicable to testing e-commerce websites.

In this article, we examine some common test cases which are specific for testing e-commerce websites. The ideas presented here are some generic high-level test cases which are applicable to most e-commerce websites, and you can use this guide to get started with testing e-commerce websites.
Testing Shopping Cart

Shopping carts are one of the main features of an e-commerce website and thus form the centerpiece of testing e-commerce websites. It allows for customers to select and store multiple items in the cart and purchase them all at once.

Nowadays, shopping carts have become “intelligent” in a sense that they remember what items you store in them so you can retrieve them at a later date or even from another device.

In most cases, cookies are used to store cart data or if the user has an active account and is logged in, a session id can be stored against the user in the database. Either way, there are some key test cases which should be part of testing a shopping cart.

Add one item to the cart – the cart should be updated with the item with correct name, image, and price.

Increase the quantity of the item from the cart – the price should be updated to reflect the correct figure.

Add the same item multiple times – there should be one item in the cart, but the quantity should reflect the number of additions and the total price should reflect the sum of the price of each item.

Add multiple items of different types – For each item added, we should see a corresponding name, image, and price and total price of all items.

Remove some items from the cart – the cart should update showing the existing items in the cart, total price should reflect the new sum.

Remove all items from the cart – cart balance should be zero, no items should be displayed in the cart.

Click on an item in the cart – we should be able to see more information about the product we just clicked either as a popup or redirecting to the product page.

Add item(s) to the cart, close the browser and reopen the same site – ideally, the cart should still hold your items. N.B this particularly depends on the requirements on how the cart should behave.

Coupons – need to check that the price of the cart is discounted when we apply a coupon and not discounted when we apply an invalid or expired coupon.